README.md, before:

Sheriff 
==================
## Identification of CRISPR/cas9 edit sites in single cells
<img src="https://github.com/BradBalderson/Sheriff/blob/main/img/sheriff.png" alt="Sheriff Badge" width="600">

**Sheriff processes aligned Superb-seq data to call edit sites and quantify gene expression in single cells** 

The inputted bam must be the annotated bam file from split-pipe.

Install
-------

- [Python3.x](https://www.python.org/getit/) with the following packages:
- Numpy
- Pandas
    
To install from source:

    git clone https://github.com/BradBalderson/Sheriff.git
    cd Sheriff
    python3 setup.py install

Usage
-----
    sheriff ---help

     Usage: sheriff [OPTIONS] BAM_FILE REF_FILE BARCODE_FILE GTF_FILE
    
    ╭─ Arguments ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
    │ *    bam_file          TEXT  BAM file [default: None] [required]                                                                                                     │
    │ *    ref_file          TEXT  Fasta containing ref genome [default: None] [required]                                                                                  │
    │ *    barcode_file      TEXT  Text file containing whitelisted barcode per line [default: None] [required]                                                            │
    │ *    gtf_file          TEXT  GTF file containing relevant gene data [default: None] [required]                                                                       │
    ╰──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
    ╭─ Options ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
    │ --t7,--t7_barcode                                             TEXT     Target/query barcode sequence to denote t7 reads. Default: 'GGGAGAGTAT' [default: GGGAGAGTAT] │
    │ --blacklist,--blacklist_file                                  TEXT     Bed file that species the location of blacklist regions, these generate alot of endogenuous   │
    │                                                                        t7 reads that can lead to slow processing time and false-positive edit-site calling.Default:  │
    │                                                                        None                                                                                          │
    │                                                                        [default: None]                                                                               │
    │ --whitelist,--whitelist_file                                  TEXT     Bed file that species the location of whitelist regions, which are known edit sites and so    │
    │                                                                        will call any barcoded reads implying an edit site intersecting these regions as canonical    │
    │                                                                        edit sites.Default: None                                                                      │
    │                                                                        [default: None]                                                                               │
    │ --kmer,--kmer_size                                    -k      INTEGER  Size of kmers used to pattern match read barcodes to the t7 barcode. Default: 6 [default: 6]  │
    │ --edit_dist,--edist,--dist                                    INTEGER  +/- distance from edit site to be grouped as same edit. Default: 140 [default: 140]           │
    │ --stranded_edit_dist                                          INTEGER  Maximum allowed distance between the nearest forward and reverse edit sites at a given        │
    │                                                                        canonical edit site to qualify as real edit. Default: 15                                      │
    │                                                                        [default: 15]                                                                                 │
    │ --edit_site_min_cells                                         INTEGER  Minimum cells in edit site to be considered true edit. Default: 3 [default: 3]                │
    │ --nonbc_edit_dist,--nonbc_edist,--nonbc_dist,--nonbc          INTEGER  +/- distance from edit to mop up the non-barcoded reads.Default: 1000 [default: 1000]         │
    │ --ploidy                                                      INTEGER  Ploidy/Number of chromosomes in the genome.Default: 2 [default: 2]                            │
    │ --cnv,--cnv_file,--copy_number_variant_file                   TEXT     A bedGraph file that specifies copy-number-variation sites, that deviate from the ploidy      │
    │                                                                        number. Default: None                                                                         │
    │                                                                        [default: None]                                                                               │
    │ --blacklist_seqs                                              TEXT     Text file of sequences, with a new sequence on each line, that may be present in read         │
    │                                                                        soft-clip sequencescan confound t7 barcoded read calls. Currently only the TSO, which is a    │
    │                                                                        common left-over artifact.Default: None                                                       │
    │                                                                        [default: None]                                                                               │
    │ --mrna_count_mode                                             TEXT     Mode for quantifying gene expression,'all' is to count all reads associated with a gene,      │
    │                                                                        'polyT' is to only count polyT reads, indicating mature mRNA transcripts.Default: all         │
    │                                                                        [default: all]                                                                                │
    │ --out,--outdir,--out_dir                              -o      TEXT     Write output files to this location. Defaults to Current Working Directory [default: None]    │
    │ --install-completion                                                   Install completion for the current shell.                                                     │
    │ --show-completion                                                      Show completion for the current shell, to copy it or customize the installation.              │
    │ --help                                                                 Show this message and exit.                                                                   │
    ╰──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯

Example
------
#### Preparing reference genome
    wget http://ftp.ensembl.org/pub/release-110/fasta/homo_sapiens/dna/Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.dna.primary_assembly.fa.gz -O example_data/Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.dna.primary_assembly.fa.gz
    gzip -d example_data/Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.dna.primary_assembly.fa.gz
    samtools faidx example_data/Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.dna.primary_assembly.fa

#### Preparing reference annotations
    wget http://ftp.ensembl.org/pub/release-110/gtf/homo_sapiens/Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.110.gtf.gz -O example_data/Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.110.gtf.gz
    gzip -d example_data/Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.110.gtf.gz

#### Running Sheriff
***NOTE*** The bam file used here is for the more deeply sequenced 500 cell library, with reads subsetted to those occuring
with 200kb of a true called canonical edit site in a larger 10k cell library. Therefore the edit site calling will be 
accurate (though will be missing some edit sites compared with the 10k library), ***BUT*** the gene counts will be NOT
accurate because most reads have been filtered from the bam so can easily make it available via github.

#### Setting parameters
***NOTE*** 
For minimum cells to call canonical edit site, used 3 for 10k library, recommend increasing for larger cell libraries to reduce false positive calls.
CNV file only necessary if have copy number variants in the genome, can exclude and will assume 2 copies throughout. See 'ploidy' parameter.

    dir_="example_data/"
    bam_="${dir_}barcode_headAligned_anno.sorted.edit_regions_200kb.bam"
    ref_="${dir_}Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.dna.primary_assembly.fa"
    cells_="${dir_}barcode_whitelist.500-cell.txt"
    gtf_="${dir_}Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.110.gtf"
    cnv_="${dir_}K562_CNV_hg19.tsv"
    blacklist_="${dir_}black_100x_peaks_by_qval.simple_repeats_50N.EXTRA.bed"
    blacklist_seqs="${dir_}blacklist_seqs.txt"
    min_="1" 
    out_dir="./subset_500_cell_sheriff_output/"

    sheriff ${bam_} ${ref_} ${cells_} ${gtf_} --cnv_file ${cnv_} --blacklist_file ${blacklist_} --blacklist_seqs ${blacklist_seqs} --edit_site_min_cells ${min_} -o ${out_dir} 

Output
------

Output files include:

- **output_prefix.bed**: The called edit sites locations.

Citation
--------

Contact
-------

Authors: Brad Balderson, Michael Lorenzini, Aaron Ho, Graham McVicker

Contact:  bbalderson@salk.edu

Commit message:

Updated README with output file information

README.md, after:

Sheriff 
==================
## Identification of CRISPR/cas9 edit sites in single cells
<img src="https://github.com/BradBalderson/Sheriff/blob/main/img/sheriff.png" alt="Sheriff Badge" width="600">

**Sheriff processes aligned Superb-seq data to call edit sites and quantify gene expression in single cells** 

The inputted bam must be the annotated bam file from split-pipe.

Install
-------

- [Python3.x](https://www.python.org/getit/) with the following packages:
- Numpy
- Pandas
    
To install from source:

    git clone https://github.com/BradBalderson/Sheriff.git
    cd Sheriff
    python3 setup.py install

Usage
-----
    sheriff ---help

     Usage: sheriff [OPTIONS] BAM_FILE REF_FILE BARCODE_FILE GTF_FILE
    
    ╭─ Arguments ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
    │ *    bam_file          TEXT  BAM file [default: None] [required]                                                                                                     │
    │ *    ref_file          TEXT  Fasta containing ref genome [default: None] [required]                                                                                  │
    │ *    barcode_file      TEXT  Text file containing whitelisted barcode per line [default: None] [required]                                                            │
    │ *    gtf_file          TEXT  GTF file containing relevant gene data [default: None] [required]                                                                       │
    ╰──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
    ╭─ Options ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
    │ --t7,--t7_barcode                                             TEXT     Target/query barcode sequence to denote t7 reads. Default: 'GGGAGAGTAT' [default: GGGAGAGTAT] │
    │ --blacklist,--blacklist_file                                  TEXT     Bed file that species the location of blacklist regions, these generate alot of endogenuous   │
    │                                                                        t7 reads that can lead to slow processing time and false-positive edit-site calling.Default:  │
    │                                                                        None                                                                                          │
    │                                                                        [default: None]                                                                               │
    │ --whitelist,--whitelist_file                                  TEXT     Bed file that species the location of whitelist regions, which are known edit sites and so    │
    │                                                                        will call any barcoded reads implying an edit site intersecting these regions as canonical    │
    │                                                                        edit sites.Default: None                                                                      │
    │                                                                        [default: None]                                                                               │
    │ --kmer,--kmer_size                                    -k      INTEGER  Size of kmers used to pattern match read barcodes to the t7 barcode. Default: 6 [default: 6]  │
    │ --edit_dist,--edist,--dist                                    INTEGER  +/- distance from edit site to be grouped as same edit. Default: 140 [default: 140]           │
    │ --stranded_edit_dist                                          INTEGER  Maximum allowed distance between the nearest forward and reverse edit sites at a given        │
    │                                                                        canonical edit site to qualify as real edit. Default: 15                                      │
    │                                                                        [default: 15]                                                                                 │
    │ --edit_site_min_cells                                         INTEGER  Minimum cells in edit site to be considered true edit. Default: 3 [default: 3]                │
    │ --nonbc_edit_dist,--nonbc_edist,--nonbc_dist,--nonbc          INTEGER  +/- distance from edit to mop up the non-barcoded reads.Default: 1000 [default: 1000]         │
    │ --ploidy                                                      INTEGER  Ploidy/Number of chromosomes in the genome.Default: 2 [default: 2]                            │
    │ --cnv,--cnv_file,--copy_number_variant_file                   TEXT     A bedGraph file that specifies copy-number-variation sites, that deviate from the ploidy      │
    │                                                                        number. Default: None                                                                         │
    │                                                                        [default: None]                                                                               │
    │ --blacklist_seqs                                              TEXT     Text file of sequences, with a new sequence on each line, that may be present in read         │
    │                                                                        soft-clip sequencescan confound t7 barcoded read calls. Currently only the TSO, which is a    │
    │                                                                        common left-over artifact.Default: None                                                       │
    │                                                                        [default: None]                                                                               │
    │ --mrna_count_mode                                             TEXT     Mode for quantifying gene expression,'all' is to count all reads associated with a gene,      │
    │                                                                        'polyT' is to only count polyT reads, indicating mature mRNA transcripts.Default: all         │
    │                                                                        [default: all]                                                                                │
    │ --out,--outdir,--out_dir                              -o      TEXT     Write output files to this location. Defaults to Current Working Directory [default: None]    │
    │ --install-completion                                                   Install completion for the current shell.                                                     │
    │ --show-completion                                                      Show completion for the current shell, to copy it or customize the installation.              │
    │ --help                                                                 Show this message and exit.                                                                   │
    ╰──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯

Example
------
#### Preparing reference genome
    wget http://ftp.ensembl.org/pub/release-110/fasta/homo_sapiens/dna/Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.dna.primary_assembly.fa.gz -O example_data/Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.dna.primary_assembly.fa.gz
    gzip -d example_data/Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.dna.primary_assembly.fa.gz
    samtools faidx example_data/Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.dna.primary_assembly.fa

#### Preparing reference annotations
    wget http://ftp.ensembl.org/pub/release-110/gtf/homo_sapiens/Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.110.gtf.gz -O example_data/Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.110.gtf.gz
    gzip -d example_data/Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.110.gtf.gz

#### Running Sheriff
***NOTE*** The bam file used here is for the more deeply sequenced 500 cell library, with reads subsetted to those occuring
with 200kb of a true called canonical edit site in a larger 10k cell library. Therefore the edit site calling will be 
accurate (though will be missing some edit sites compared with the 10k library), ***BUT*** the gene counts will be NOT
accurate because most reads have been filtered from the bam so can easily make it available via github.

#### Setting parameters
***NOTE*** 
For minimum cells to call canonical edit site, used 3 for 10k library, recommend increasing for larger cell libraries to reduce false positive calls.
CNV file only necessary if have copy number variants in the genome, can exclude and will assume 2 copies throughout. See 'ploidy' parameter.

    dir_="example_data/"
    bam_="${dir_}barcode_headAligned_anno.sorted.edit_regions_200kb.bam"
    ref_="${dir_}Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.dna.primary_assembly.fa"
    cells_="${dir_}barcode_whitelist.500-cell.txt"
    gtf_="${dir_}Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.110.gtf"
    cnv_="${dir_}K562_CNV_hg19.tsv"
    blacklist_="${dir_}black_100x_peaks_by_qval.simple_repeats_50N.EXTRA.bed"
    blacklist_seqs="${dir_}blacklist_seqs.txt"
    min_="1" 
    out_dir="./subset_500_cell_sheriff_output/"

    sheriff ${bam_} ${ref_} ${cells_} ${gtf_} --cnv_file ${cnv_} --blacklist_file ${blacklist_} --blacklist_seqs ${blacklist_seqs} --edit_site_min_cells ${min_} -o ${out_dir} 

Output
------

Output files include:

- **edit_site_info.txt**: Has the edit site information, name, location, window size, and overlapping genes.
- **edit_site.bed**: Bed file of the edit site locations.
- **t7_barcode_edits.tsv**: Particular edit events, with detail on which canonical-edit-site the edit belongs to,
                            and the ref and alt sequence at the particular edit site.
- **cell_allelic_dosage.canonical-edit-sites.parquet.gz**: (cell X edit-site) matrix of counts, for called allelic edits.
- **cell_allelic_dosage.canonical-edit-sites.gene-collapsed.parquet.gz**: (cell X edit-site OR edit-gene) matrix of allelic edits, but collapse to the gene level for edit-sites that intersect genes.
- **cell_gene_mrna_counts.parquet.gz**: (cell X gene) The UMI counts per gene, excluding confounding T7 reads.
- **t7_barcoded_counts.parquet.gz**: (cell X edit-site) matrix with number of t7 barcoded UMIs per cell.
- **t7_nonbarcoded_counts.parquet.gz**: (cell X edit-site) matrix with number of UMIs per cell for reads that were +/- some distance from canonical edit sites, and were subsequently filtered from gene counting.
- **t7_all_counts.parquet.gz**: (cell X edit-site) matrix of all T7 related UMIs, addition of both t7_barcoded_counts.parquet.gz AND t7_nonbarcoded_counts.parquet.gz.

#### Below are just for sanity checking / visualisation, but less important for downstream analysis
- **t7_reads.txt**: List of call t7 read names in bam.
- **t7_barcoded_reads.txt**: List of t7 barcoded reads in bam.
- **t7_non-barcoded_reads.txt**: List of t7 non-barcoded reads in bam.
- **t7_filt.bam**: Bam file containing only the mRNA reads, i.e. removes reads +/- a certain bp range from the canonical edit sites.
- **t7_only.bam**: Bam file containing only the t7 reads, which includes barcoded reads as well as some reads that could potentially be t7 reads.
- **t7_non-barcoded_only.bam**: Bam containing all reads that were within some +/- bp distance from canonical edit sites, potential non-barcoded T7 reads.
- **t7_barcoded_only.bam**: Bam file containing only the BARCODED t7 reads, called be the kmer match in the 5' soft-clip.

Reading output
------
***NOTE*** for the parquet.gz files, these can be rapidly read with pandas in Python:

    import pandas as pd

    cell_by_gene_edit_dosage = pd.read_parquet("example_data/cell_allelic_dosage.canonical-edit-sites.gene-collapsed.parquet.gz")

Citation
--------

Contact
-------

Authors: Brad Balderson, Michael Lorenzini, Aaron Ho, Graham McVicker

Contact:  bbalderson@salk.edu
